---
title: 'Power Spectrum: something I wish I could understand early'
date: 2022-02-01 10:00:00
categories: [DSP esstntials]
tags: [dsp, power spectrum]
---

Other than the time plot, the power spectrum and the spectrogram (a plot that shows the signal in time and frequency domain) are probably the most important tools for digital signal analysis.
Because of its importance, people invented so many algorithms to estimate and present it in various ways.
In Matlab, you can use `periodogram`, `pwelch`, `pspectrum`, `pburg`, `pmusic`, and many more of them.
It is so overwhelming for me at the beginning (and even now), but from time to time, I gradually get used to it and make sense of it.
In this blog, I am going to talk about a few power spectrum-related short topics that confused me in the early days.

## Why power spectrum

So why bother power spectrum, why can't we apply the Fourier Transform directly to the signal and get the frequency spectrum? This may be the first question many people will ask.

If the signal is periodic or more specifically, deterministic, we can use the frequency spectrum to present the signal.
However, most signals we are dealing with are stochastic (random, non-deterministic) signals, or with a stochastic component.
In addition, these signals are usually infinite in length, and we can't apply an infinite length of Fourier Transform.
If we truncate the stochastic signal into segments and apply the Fourier Transform to each segment, we can find the frequency spectra are random in both magnitude and phase at a given frequency.

The frequency spectrum analysis is only applicable to deterministic signals.
As for stochastic signals, they can be analyzed statistically, or in our case, be averaged.
Because of the random phase mentioned before, the mean of frequency spectra is probably zero.
Although the frequency spectra are complex-valued, the power spectra are real-valued and can be averaged.
The periodogram method is essentially the averaged power spectra alone multiply signal segments.

## Why power spectrum density

## Parametric and nonparametric estimation

## Real and complex signals

to be continued
