---
title: 'A Simple Parser in C Using Getopt'
date: 2022-06-18 11:20:00
categories: [Programming, C]
tags: [c, parser, getopt]
math: false
mermaid: false
---

In Python, there is an official module called `argparse` that provides a versatile command-line parser.
Things are a little bit different in C, though.
The GNU’s `getopt()` function is used to parse the command-line arguments with limited functionalities.
In this post, I will show how to use `getopt()` to parse command-line arguments in C.

## Getopt in an Example

The basic usage of `getopt()` is as follows:

```c
#include <unistd.h>
int getopt(int argc, char **argv, char *optstring);
```

The `argc` and `argv` are passed from `main()` in C.
The `optstring` is a string of characters that specifies the valid **options**.
For example, a string `"abc:d:"` means that the valid options are `-a`, `-b`, `-c`, and `-d`.
Characters followed by a colon to indicate an option **argument** is to follow.
So in this example, they are `-c argument` and `-d argument`.
The argument is saved in an external variable `optarg` as a string.

The `getopt()` function incrementally parses a command-line argument list `argv` and returns the next known option character.
If there are no more options, `-1` is returned.
In practice, the `getopt()` function is used in the following way:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int c;
    while ((c = getopt(argc, argv, "ab:c")) != -1) {
        switch (c) {
        case 'a':
            printf("option a\n");
            break;
        case 'b':
            printf("option b with value '%s'\n", optarg);
            break;
        case 'c':
            printf("option c\n");
            break;
        case '?':
            printf("unknown option\n");
            break;
        default:
            abort();
        }
    }
    return 0;
}
```

## Limitations

* The `getopt()` function does not support long options, only single-character options are supported.
* There is no type casting or checking in the arguments, so extra care should be taken to make sure the arguments are correct.
* It cannot generate help messages. You will have to write your own help messages by adding a `-h` option.

## Further Reading

Read the `getopt(3)` manual page using `man 3 getopt` to learn more about what `getopt` can do for you.
I also found another well-written [blog](https://leimao.github.io/blog/Argument-Parser-Getopt-C/) on this topic you may be interested in.

That is all for this post.
Hasta Luego.
